

-- 1 of 31 --

W H A T 	W E N T 	R I G H T ?
AgênciaClick, an interactive advertising and online communications company based in Sao
Paulo, Brazil, made PMI’s list of outstanding organizations in project management in 2007.
Since 2002, the company saw revenues jump 132 percent, primarily due to its five-year
emphasis on practicing good project management across the entire company. AgênciaClick
launched a PMO in 2002 and used the PMBOK® Guide as the basis for developing its meth-
odology and project management training program. The company also developed a custom
project tracking system to help calculate work progress each day and alert managers of any
schedule or cost problems. PMO Director Fabiano D’Agostinho said, “We realized the only
way to manage multiple dynamic projects and deliver great products is to focus on project
management . . . By monitoring and controlling projects and programs more efficiently, senior
managers can focus on issues within the portfolio that need more attention.”8
The following section describes an example of applying the project management process
groups to a project at JWD Consulting. It uses some of the ideas from the PMBOK® Guide, Fifth
Edition, some ideas from other methodologies, and some new ideas to meet unique project
needs. The first case study follows a more predictive or waterfall approach, while the second
case study follows a more adaptive approach using Scrum. Both still use the project manage-
ment process groups and several outputs or deliverables described in the PMBOK® Guide.
CASE STUDY 1: JWD CONSULTING’S
PROJECT MANAGEMENT INTRANET SITE PROJECT
(PREDICTIVE APPROACH)
The following fictitious case provides an example of the elements involved in managing a
project from start to finish. This example also uses Microsoft Project to demonstrate how
project management software can assist in several aspects of managing a project. Several
templates illustrate how project teams prepare various project management documents.
Files for these and other templates are available on the companion Web site for this text.
Details on creating many of the documents shown are provided in later chapters, so do not
worry if you do not understand everything right now. You might want to read this section
again later to enhance your learning.
Project Pre-Initiation and Initiation
In project management, initiating includes recognizing and starting a new project. An organi-
zation should put considerable thought into project selection to ensure that it initiates the
right kinds of projects for the right reasons. It is better to have a moderate or even small
amount of success on an important project than huge success on a project that is unim-
portant. The selection of projects for initiation is therefore crucial, as is the selection of proj-
ect managers. Ideally, the project manager would be involved in initiating a project, but often
the project manager is selected after many initiation decisions have already been made. You
will learn more about project selection in Chapter 4, Project Integration Management. Orga-
nizations must also understand and plan for the ongoing support that is often required after
implementing a new system or other product or service resulting from a project.
91
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 2 of 31 --

It is important to remember that strategic planning should serve as the foundation for
deciding which projects to pursue. The organization’s strategic plan expresses the vision,
mission, goals, objectives, and strategies of the organization. It also provides the basis for
IT project planning. IT is usually a support function in an organization, so the people who
initiate IT projects must understand how those projects relate to current and future needs
of the organization. For example, JWD Consulting’s main business is providing consulting
services to other organizations, not developing its own intranet site applications. Informa-
tion systems, therefore, must support the firm’s business goals, such as providing consult-
ing services more effectively and efficiently.
An organization may initiate IT projects for several reasons, but the most important
reason is to support business objectives. Providing a good return on investment at a reason-
able level of risk is also important, especially in tough economic times. As mentioned in the
chapter’s opening case, JWD Consulting wants to follow an exemplary process for managing
its projects because its core business is helping other organizations manage projects. Devel-
oping an intranet to share its project management knowledge could help JWD Consulting
reduce internal costs by working more effectively, and by allowing existing and potential
customers to access some of the firm’s information. JWD Consulting could also increase
revenues by bringing in more business. Therefore, the firm will use these metrics— reducing
internal costs and increasing revenues—to measure its performance on this project.
Pre-Initiation Tasks
It is good practice to lay the groundwork for a project before it officially starts. Senior managers
often perform several tasks, sometimes called pre-initiation tasks, including the following:
• 	Determine the scope, time, and cost constraints for the project
• 	Identify the project sponsor
• 	Select the project manager
• 	Develop a business case for a project
• 	Meet with the project manager to review the process and expectations for
managing the project
• 	Determine if the project should be divided into two or more smaller projects
As described in the opening case, the CEO of JWD Consulting, Joe Fleming, defined the
high-level scope of the project. He wanted to sponsor the project himself because it was his
idea and it was strategically important to the business. He wanted Erica Bell, the PMO Direc-
tor, to manage the project after proving there was a strong business case for it. If there was a
strong business case for pursuing the project, then Joe and Erica would meet to review the
process and expectations for managing the project. If there was not a strong business case, the
project would not continue. As for the necessity of the last pre-initiation task, many people
know from experience that it is easier to successfully complete a small project than a large
one, especially for IT projects. It often makes sense to break large projects down into two or
more smaller ones to help increase the odds of success. In this case, however, Joe and Erica
decided that the work could be done in one project that would last about six months. To jus-
tify investing in this project, Erica drafted a business case for it, getting input and feedback
from Joe, from one of her senior staff members in the PMO, and from a member of the
Finance department. She also used a corporate template and sample business cases from past
projects as a guide. Table 3-2 provides the business case. (Note that this example and others
92
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 3 of 31 --

TABLE 3-2 	JWD Consulting’s business case
1.0 Introduction/Background
JWD Consulting’s core business goal is to provide world-class project management consulting services to
various organizations. The CEO, Joe Fleming, believes the firm can streamline operations and increase
business by providing information related to project management on its intranet site, making some
information and services accessible to current and potential clients.
2.0 Business Objective
JWD Consulting’s strategic goals include continuing growth and profitability. The project management
intranet site project will support these goals by increasing visibility of the firm’s expertise to current and
potential clients by allowing client and public access to some sections of the intranet. The project will also
improve profitability by reducing internal costs by providing standard tools, techniques, templates, and
project management knowledge to all internal consultants. Because JWD Consulting focuses on identifying
profitable projects and measuring their value after completion, this project must meet those criteria.
3.0 Current Situation and Problem/Opportunity Statement
JWD Consulting has a corporate Web site as well as an intranet. The firm currently uses the Web site for
marketing information. The primary use of the intranet is for human resource information, such as
where consultants enter their hours on various projects, change and view their benefits information, and
access an online directory and Web-based e-mail system. The firm also uses an enterprise-wide project
management system to track all project information, focusing on the status of deliverables and meeting
scope, time, and cost goals. There is an opportunity to provide a new section on the intranet dedicated to
sharing consultants’ project management knowledge across the organization. JWD Consulting only hires
experienced consultants and gives them freedom to manage projects as they see fit. However, as the
business grows and projects become more complex, even experienced project managers are looking for
suggestions on how to work more effectively.
4.0 Critical Assumptions and Constraints
The proposed intranet site must be a valuable asset for JWD Consulting. Current consultants and clients
must actively support the project, and it must pay for itself within one year by reducing internal
operating costs and generating new business. The Project Management Office manager must lead the
effort, and the project team must include participants from several parts of the company, as well as from
current client organizations. The new system must run on existing hardware and software, and it should
require minimal technical support. It must be easily accessible by consultants and clients and be secure
from unauthorized users.
5.0 Analysis of Options and Recommendation
There are three options for addressing this opportunity:
1. Do nothing. The business is doing well, and we can continue to operate without this new project.
2. Purchase access to specialized software to support this new capability with little in-house
development.
3. Design and implement the new intranet capabilities in-house, using mostly existing hardware and
software.
Based on discussions with stakeholders, we believe that option 3 is the best option.
6.0 Preliminary Project Requirements
The main features of the project management intranet site include the following:
1. Access to several project management templates and tools. Users must be able to search for tem-
plates and tools, read instructions for using these templates and tools, and see examples of how to
(continued)
93
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 4 of 31 --

TABLE 3-2 	JWD Consulting’s business case (continued)
apply them to real projects. Users must also be able to submit new templates and tools, which
should first be screened or edited by the Project Management Office.
2. Access to relevant project management articles. Many consultants and clients sense an information
overload when they research project management information. They often waste time they should
be spending with their clients. The new intranet should include access to several important arti-
cles on various project management topics, which are searchable by topic, and allow users to ask
the Project Management Office staff to find additional articles to meet their needs.
3. Links to other, up-to-date Web sites, with brief descriptions of the main features of the external
sites.
4. An “Ask the Expert” feature to help build relationships with current and future clients and share
knowledge with internal consultants.
5. Appropriate security to make the entire intranet site accessible to internal consultants and certain
sections accessible to others.
6. The ability to charge money for access to some information. Some of the information and features
of the intranet site should prompt external users to pay for the information or service. Payment
options should include a credit card option or similar online payment transactions. After the sys-
tem verifies payment, the user should be able to access or download the desired information.
7. Other features suggested by users, if they add value to the business.
7.0 Budget Estimate and Financial Analysis
A preliminary estimate of costs for the entire project is $140,000. This estimate is based on the project
manager working about 20 hours per week for six months and other internal staff working a total of
about 60 hours per week for six months. The customer representatives would not be paid for their
assistance. A staff project manager would earn $50 per hour. The hourly rate for the other project team
members would be $70 per hour, because some hours normally billed to clients may be needed for this
project. The initial cost estimate also includes $10,000 for purchasing software and services from
suppliers. After the project is completed, maintenance costs of $40,000 are included for each year,
primarily to update the information and coordinate the “Ask the Expert” feature and online articles.
Projected benefits are based on a reduction in hours that consultants spend researching project
management information, appropriate tools, and templates. Projected benefits are also based on a small
increase in profits due to new business generated by this project. If each of 400 consultants saved just 40
hours each year (less than one hour per week) and could bill that time to other projects that generate a
conservative estimate of $10 per hour in profits, then the projected benefit would be $160,000 per year.
If the new intranet increased business by just 1 percent, using past profit information, increased profits
due to new business would be at least $40,000 each year. Total projected benefits, therefore, are about
$200,000 per year. Exhibit A summarizes the projected costs and benefits and shows the estimated net
present value (NPV), return on investment (ROI), and year in which payback occurs. It also lists
assumptions made in performing this preliminary financial analysis. All of the financial estimates are
very encouraging. The estimated payback is within one year, as requested by the sponsor. The NPV is
$272,800, and the discounted ROI based on a three-year system life is excellent at 112 percent.
8.0 Schedule Estimate
The sponsor would like to see the project completed within six months, but there is some flexibility in
the schedule. We also assume that the new system will have a useful life of at least three years.
9.0 Potential Risks
This project carries several risks. The foremost risk is a lack of interest in the new system by our internal
consultants and external clients. User inputs are crucial for populating information into this system and
realizing the potential benefits from using the system. There are some technical risks in choosing the
type of software used to search the system, check security, process payments, and so on, but the
features of this system all use proven technologies. The main business risk is investing the time and
money into this project and not realizing the projected benefits.
94
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 5 of 31 --

are abbreviated. See the companion Web site for additional examples of project documents
and to download a business case template and other templates.) Notice that the following
information is included in this business case:
• 	Introduction/background
• 	Business objective
• 	Current situation and problem/opportunity statement
• 	Critical assumptions and constraints
• 	Analysis of options and recommendation
• 	Preliminary project requirements
• 	Budget estimate and financial analysis
• 	Schedule estimate
• 	Potential risks
• 	Exhibits
Because this project is relatively small and is for an internal sponsor, the business case
is not as long as many other business cases. Erica reviewed the business case with Joe, and
he agreed that the project was definitely worth pursuing. He was quite pleased to see that
payback was estimated within a year, and that the return on investment was projected to
be 112 percent. He told Erica to proceed with the formal initiation tasks for this project, as
described in the next section.
TABLE 3-2 	JWD Consulting’s business case (continued)
10.0 Exhibits
Exhibit A: Financial Analysis for Project Management Intranet Site Project
Discount rate 	8%
Assume the project is done in about 6 months
0 	1 	2 	3 	Total
Costs
Discount factor
Discounted costs 	243,084
Benefits
Discount factor
Discounted benefits 	515,419
Discounted benefits - costs
Cumulative benefits - costs
40,000
0.93
37,037
200,000
0.93
186,185
148,148
8,148
40,000
0.86
34,294
200,000
0.86
171,468
137,174
145,322
40,000
0.79
31,753
200,000
0.79
158,766
127,013
272,336 	NPV
Payback in Year 1
Discounted life cycle ROI------------>
Assumptions
Costs
PM (500 hours, $50/hour)
Staff (1500 hours, $70/hour)
Outsourced software and services
Total project costs (all applied in year 0)
Benefits
# consultants
Hours saved
$/hour profit
Benefits from saving time
Benefits from 1% increase in profits
Total annual projected benefits
Year
140,000
1
140,000
(140,000)
(140,000)
112%
# hours
25,000
105,000
10,000
400
40
10
160,000
40,000
200,000
140,000
0
0
1
© Cengage Learning 2014
95
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 6 of 31 --

Initiating
To officially initiate the project management intranet site project, Erica knew that the
main tasks were to identify all of the project stakeholders and to develop the project charter.
Table 3-3 shows these processes and their outputs, based on the PMBOK® Guide, Fifth Edition.
The main outputs are a project charter and a stakeholder register. Additional outputs that Erica
found very useful for initiating projects were a stakeholder management strategy and a formal
project kick-off meeting. Descriptions of how these outputs were created and sample docu-
ments related to each of them are provided for this project. Recall that every project and every
organization is unique, so not all project charters, stakeholder registers, and other outputs will
look the same. You will see examples of several of these documents in later chapters.
Identifying Project Stakeholders 	Erica met with Joe Fleming, the project’s sponsor, to
help identify key stakeholders for this project. Recall from Chapter 1 that stakeholders are
people involved in project activities or affected by them, and include the project sponsor,
project team, support staff, customers, users, suppliers, and even opponents to the project.
Joe, the project sponsor, knew it would be important to assemble a strong project team, and
he was very confident in Erica’s ability to lead that team. They decided that key team mem-
bers should include one of their full-time consultants with an outstanding record, Michael
Chen; one part-time consultant, Jessie Faue, who was new to the company and supported the
Project Management Office; and two members of the IT department who supported the cur-
rent intranet, Kevin Dodge and Cindy Dawson. They also knew that client inputs would be
important for this project, so Joe agreed to call the CEOs of two of the firm’s largest clients to
see if they would be willing to provide representatives to work on this project at their own
expense. All of the internal staff Joe and Erica recommended agreed to work on the project,
and the two client representatives were Kim Phuong and Page Miller. Because many other
people would be affected by this project as future users of the new intranet, Joe and Erica
also identified other key stakeholders, including their directors of IT, Human Resources (HR),
and Public Relations (PR), as well as Erica’s administrative assistant.
After Joe and Erica made the preliminary contacts, Erica documented the stake-
holders’ roles, names, organizations, and contact information in a stakeholder register, a
document that includes details related to the identified project stakeholders. Table 3-4
provides an example of part of the initial stakeholder register. Because this document
would be public, Erica was careful not to include information that might be sensitive, such
as how strongly the stakeholder supported the project and his potential influence on the
project. She would keep these issues in mind discreetly and use them in developing the
stakeholder management strategy.
A stakeholder analysis is a technique that project managers can use to help understand
and increase the support of stakeholders throughout the project. Results of the stakeholder
analysis can be documented in a stakeholder register or in a separate stakeholder
TABLE 3-3 	Project initiation knowledge areas, processes, and outputs
Knowledge Area 	Initiating Process 	Outputs
Project Integration Management 	Develop project charter 	Project charter
Project Stakeholder Management 	Identify stakeholders 	Stakeholder register
Source: PMBOK® Guide, Fifth Edition, 2012.
96
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 7 of 31 --

management strategy. This strategy includes basic information such as stakeholder names,
level of interest in the project, level of influence on the project, and potential management
strategies for gaining support or reducing obstacles from each stakeholder. Because much of
this information can be sensitive, it should be considered confidential. Some project man-
agers do not even write down this information, but they do consider it because stakeholder
management is a crucial part of their jobs. Table 3-5 provides an example of part of Erica’s
stakeholder management strategy for the project management intranet site project. You will
see other examples of documenting stakeholder information in later chapters.
Drafting the Project Charter 	Erica drafted a project charter and had the project team
members review it before showing it to Joe. Joe made a few minor changes, which Erica
incorporated. Table 3-6 shows the final project charter. (See Chapter 4 for more informa-
tion on project charters.) Note the items included on the project charter and its short
length. JWD Consulting believes that project charters should be one or two pages long, and
they may refer to other documents, such as a business case, as needed. Erica felt the most
important parts of the project charter were the signatures of key stakeholders (not
included for brevity) and their individual comments. It is hard to get stakeholders to agree
on even a one-page project charter, so everyone has a chance to make their concerns
known in the comments section. Note that Michael Chen, the senior consultant asked to
work on the project, was concerned about participating when he felt that his other
TABLE 3-5 	Stakeholder management strategy
Name
Level of
Interest
Level of
Influence 	Potential Management Strategies
Joe Fleming 	High 	High 	Joe likes to stay on top of key projects and make money.
Have a lot of short, face-to-face meetings and focus on
achieving the financial benefits of the project.
Louise Mills 	Low 	High 	Louise has a lot of things on her plate, and she does not seem
excited about this project. She may be looking at other job
opportunities. Show her how this project will help the
company and her resume.
© Cengage Learning 2014
TABLE 3-4 	Stakeholder register
Name 	Position
Internal/
External
Project
Role 	Contact Information
Joe Fleming 	CEO 	Internal 	Sponsor 	joe_fleming@jwdconsulting.com
Erica Bell 	PMO Director 	Internal 	Project
manager
erica_bell@jwdconsulting.com
Michael Chen 	Team member 	Internal 	Team
member
michael_chen@jwdconsulting.com
Kim Phuong 	Business analyst 	External 	Advisor 	kim_phuong@client1.com
Louise Mills 	PR Director 	Internal 	Advisor 	louise_mills@jwdconsulting.com
© Cengage Learning 2014
97
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 8 of 31 --

TABLE 3-6 	Project charter
Project Title: Project Management Intranet Site Project
Project Start Date: May 2 	Projected Finish Date: November 4
Budget Information: The firm has allocated $140,000 for this project. The majority of costs for this
project will be internal labor. An initial estimate provides a total of 80 hours per week.
Project Manager: Erica Bell, (310) 555-5896, erica_bell@jwdconsulting.com
Project Objectives: Develop a new capability accessible on JWD Consulting’s intranet site to help internal
consultants and external customers manage projects more effectively. The intranet site will include several
templates and tools that users can download, examples of completed templates and related project
management documents used on real projects, important articles related to recent project management
topics, an article retrieval service, links to other sites with useful information, and an “Ask the Expert”
feature, where users can post questions about their projects and receive advice from experts in the field.
Some parts of the intranet site will be accessible free to the public, other parts will only be accessible to
current customers and internal consultants, and other parts will be accessible for a fee.
Main Project Success Criteria: The project should pay for itself within one year of completion.
Approach:
• 	Develop a survey to determine critical features of the new intranet site and solicit input from
consultants and customers.
• 	Review internal and external templates and examples of project management documents.
• 	Research software to provide security, manage user inputs, and facilitate the article retrieval
and “Ask the Expert” features.
• 	Develop the intranet site using an iterative approach, soliciting a great deal of user feedback.
• 	Determine a way to measure the value of the intranet site in terms of reduced costs and new
revenues, both during the project and one year after project completion.
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Name 	Role 	Position 	Contact Information
Joe Fleming 	Sponsor 	JWD Consulting, CEO 	joe_fleming@jwdconsulting.com
Erica Bell 	Project Manager 	JWD Consulting,
manager
erica_bell@jwdconsulting.com
Michael Chen 	Team Member 	JWD Consulting, senior
consultant
michael_chen@jwdconsulting.com
Jessie Faue 	Team Member 	JWD Consulting, consultant 	jessie_faue@jwdconsulting.com
Kevin Dodge 	Team Member 	JWD Consulting, IT
department
kevin_dodge@jwdconsulting.com
Cindy Dawson 	Team Member 	JWD Consulting, IT
department
cindy_dawson@jwdconsulting.com
Kim Phuong 	Advisor 	Client representative 	kim_phuong@client1.com
Page Miller 	Advisor 	Client representative 	page_miller@client2.com
Sign-Off: (Signatures of all the above stakeholders)
Comments: (Handwritten or typed comments from above stakeholders, if applicable)
“I will support this project as time allows, but I believe my client projects take priority. I will have one of my
assistants support the project as needed.”—Michael Chen
“We need to be extremely careful testing this new system, especially the security in
giving access to parts of the intranet site to the public and clients.”—Kevin Dodge
and Cindy Dawson
© Cengage Learning 2014
98
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 9 of 31 --

assignments with external clients might have a higher priority. He offered to have an
assistant help as needed. The IT staff members mentioned their concerns about testing
and security issues. Erica knew that she would have to consider these concerns when
managing the project.
Holding a Project Kick-off Meeting 	Experienced project managers like Erica know that it is
crucial to get projects off to a great start. Holding a good kick-off meeting is an excellent way to
do this. A kick-off meeting is a meeting held at the beginning of a project so that stakeholders
can meet each other, review the goals of the project, and discuss future plans. The kick-off
meeting is often held after the business case and project charter are completed, but it could be
held sooner, as needed. Even if some or all project stakeholders must meet virtually, it is still
important to have a kick-off meeting.
Erica also knows that all project meetings with major stakeholders should include an
agenda. Figure 3-2 shows the agenda that Erica provided for the project management
intranet site project kick-off meeting. Notice the main topics in an agenda:
• 	Meeting objective
• 	Agenda (lists in order the topics to be discussed)
[Date of Meeting]
Project Management Intranet Site Project
© Cengage Learning 2014
FIGURE 3-2 	Kick-off meeting agenda
99
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 10 of 31 --

• 	A section for documenting action items, who they are assigned to, and when
each person will complete the action
• 	A section to document the date and time of the next meeting
It is good practice to focus on results of meetings, which is why a good agenda has
sections for documenting action items and deciding on the next meeting date and time. It
is also good practice to document meeting minutes, focusing on key decisions and action
items. Erica planned to send the meeting minutes to all meeting participants and other
appropriate stakeholders within a day or two of the meeting.
Project Planning
Planning is often the most difficult and unappreciated process in project management.
Because planning is not always used to facilitate action, many people view planning nega-
tively. The main purpose of project plans, however, is to guide project execution. To guide
execution, plans must be realistic and useful, so a fair amount of time and effort must go
into the planning process; people who are knowledgeable with the work need to plan the
work. Chapter 4, Project Integration Management, provides detailed information on pre-
paring a project management plan, and Chapters 5 through 13 describe planning processes
for each of the other knowledge areas.
Table 3-7 lists the project management knowledge areas, processes, and outputs of
project planning according to the PMBOK® Guide, Fifth Edition. There are many
potential outputs from the planning process group, and every knowledge area is
included. Just a few planning documents from JWD Consulting’s project management
intranet site project are provided in this chapter as examples, and later chapters include
many more examples. Recall that the PMBOK® Guide is only a guide, so many organi-
zations may have different planning outputs based on their particular needs, as is the
case in this example. You can also use many templates for planning; several are listed in
the last section of this chapter.
Because the project management intranet site project is relatively small, Erica believes
some of the most important planning documents to focus on are the following:
• 	A team contract (not listed in Table 3-7, which is based only on the PMBOK®
Guide)
• 	A project scope statement
• 	A work breakdown structure (WBS), a key part of the scope baseline
• 	A project schedule, in the form of a Gantt chart with all dependencies and
resources entered
• 	A list of prioritized risks (part of a risk register)
All of these documents, as well as other project-related information, will be available
to all team members on a project Web site. JWD Consulting has used project Web sites for
several years, and has found that they help facilitate communications and document proj-
ect information. For larger projects, JWD Consulting also creates many of the other out-
puts listed in Table 3-7. (You will learn more about these documents by knowledge area in
the following chapters.)
Soon after the project team signed the project charter, Erica organized a team-building
meeting for the project management intranet site project. An important part of the meeting
100
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 11 of 31 --

TABLE 3-7 	Planning processes and outputs
Knowledge Area 	Planning Process 	Outputs
Project Integration
Management
Develop project
management plan
Project management plan
Project Scope Management 	Plan scope management 	Scope management plan
Requirements management plan
Collect requirements 	Requirements documentation
Requirements traceability matrix
Define scope 	Project scope statement
Project documents updates
Create WBS 	Scope baseline
Project documents updates
Project Time Management 	Plan schedule management 	Schedule management plan
Define activities 	Activity list
Activity attributes
Milestone list
Project management plan updates
Sequence activities 	Project schedule network diagrams
Project documents updates
Estimate activity resources 	Activity resource requirements
Resource breakdown structure
Project documents updates
Estimate activity durations 	Activity duration estimates
Project documents updates
Develop schedule 	Schedule baseline
Project schedule
Schedule data
Project calendars
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Cost Management 	Plan cost management 	Cost management plan
Estimate costs 	Activity cost estimates
Basis of estimates
Project documents updates
Determine budget 	Cost baseline
Project funding requirements
Project documents updates
(continued)
101
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 12 of 31 --

was helping the project team get to know each other. Erica had met and talked to each
member separately, but this was the first time the project team would spend much time
together. Jessie Faue worked in the Project Management Office with Erica, so they knew each
other well, but Jessie was new to the company and did not know any of the other team mem-
bers. Michael Chen was a senior consultant and often worked on the highest-priority projects
for external clients. He attended the meeting with his assistant, Jill Anderson, who would also
support the project when Michael was too busy. Everyone valued Michael’s expertise, and
he was extremely straightforward in dealing with people. He also knew both of the client
TABLE 3-7 	Planning processes and outputs (continued)
Knowledge Area 	Planning Process 	Outputs
Project Quality Management 	Plan quality management 	Quality management plan
Process improvement plan
Quality metrics
Quality checklists
Project documents updates
Project Human Resource
Management
Plan human resource
management
Human resource plan
Project Communications
Management
Plan communications
management
Communications management
plan
Project documents updates
Project Risk Management 	Plan risk management 	Risk management plan
Identify risks 	Risk register
Perform qualitative risk
analysis
Project documents updates
Perform quantitative risk
analysis
Project documents updates
Plan risk responses 	Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Procurement
Management
Plan procurement
management
Procurement management plan
Procurement statement of work
Procurement documents
Source selection criteria
Make-or-buy decisions
Change requests
Project Stakeholder
Management
Plan stakeholder
management
Stakeholder management plan
Project documents updates
Source: PMBOK® Guide, Fifth Edition, 2012.
102
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 13 of 31 --

representatives from past projects. Kevin Dodge was JWD Consulting’s intranet guru, who
tended to focus on technical details. Cindy Dawson was also from the IT department and had
experience working as a business consultant and negotiating with outside suppliers. Kim
Phuong and Page Miller, the two client representatives, were excited about the project, but
they were wary of sharing sensitive information about their companies.
Erica had all participants introduce themselves, and then she led an icebreaking
activity so everyone would be more relaxed. She asked all participants to describe their
dream vacations, assuming that cost was no issue. This activity helped everyone get to
know each other and show different aspects of their personalities. Erica knew that it was
important to build a strong team and have everyone work well together.
Erica then explained the importance of the project, again reviewing the signed proj-
ect charter. She explained that an important tool to help a project team work together
was to have members develop a team contract that everyone felt comfortable signing.
JWD Consulting believed in using team contracts for all projects to help promote team-
work and clarify team communications. She explained the main topics covered in a
team contract and showed them a team contract template. She then had the team
members form two smaller groups, with one consultant, one IT department member, and
one client representative in each group. These smaller groups made it easier for every-
one to contribute ideas. Each group shared its ideas for what should go into the con-
tract, and then everyone worked together to form one project team contract. Table 3-8
shows the resulting team contract, which took about 90 minutes to create. Erica could
see that there were different personalities on this team, but she felt they all could work
together well.
Erica wanted to keep the meeting to its two-hour time limit. The next task would be
to clarify the scope of the project by developing a project scope statement and WBS. She
knew it took time to develop these documents, but she wanted to get a feel for what
everyone thought were the main deliverables for this project, their roles in producing
those deliverables, and what areas of the project scope needed clarification. She
reminded everyone what their budget and schedule goals were so they would keep the
goals in mind as they discussed the scope of the project. She also asked each person to
provide the number of hours he or she would be available to work on this project each
month for the next six months. She then had each person write answers to the following
questions:
1. 	List one item that is most unclear to you about the scope of this project.
2. 	What other questions do you have or issues do you foresee about the scope of
the project?
3. 	List what you believe to be the main deliverables for this project.
4. 	Which deliverables do you think you will help create or review?
Erica collected everyone’s inputs. She explained that she would take this information
and work with Jessie to develop the first draft of the scope statement that she would
e-mail to everyone by the end of the week. She also suggested that they all meet again
in one week to develop the scope statement further and to start creating the WBS for the
project.
103
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 14 of 31 --

Erica and Jessie reviewed all the information and created the first draft of the scope
statement. At their next team meeting, they discussed the scope statement and got a good
start on the WBS. Table 3-9 shows a portion of the scope statement that Erica created after
a few more e-mails and another team meeting. Note that the scope statement lists the
product characteristics and requirements, summarizes the deliverables, and describes
project success criteria in detail.
As the project team worked on the scope statement, it also developed the work
breakdown structure (WBS) for the project. The WBS is a very important tool in project
management because it provides the basis for deciding how to do the work. The WBS
TABLE 3-8 	Team contract
Code of Conduct: As a project team, we will:
• 	Work proactively, anticipating potential problems and working to prevent them.
• 	Keep other team members informed of information related to the project.
• 	Focus on what is best for the entire project team.
Participation: We will:
• 	Be honest and open during all project activities.
• 	Encourage diversity in team work.
• 	Provide the opportunity for equal participation.
• 	Be open to new approaches and consider new ideas.
• 	Have one discussion at a time.
• 	Let the project manager know well in advance if a team member has to miss a meeting
or may have trouble meeting a deadline for a given task.
Communication: We will:
• 	Decide as a team on the best way to communicate. Because a few team members cannot
often meet face to face, we will use e-mail, a project Web site, and other technology to
assist in communicating.
• 	Have the project manager facilitate all meetings and arrange for phone and video con-
ferences, as needed.
• 	Work together to create the project schedule and enter actuals into the enterprise-wide
project management system by 4 p.m. every Friday.
• 	Present ideas clearly and concisely.
• 	Keep discussions on track.
Problem Solving: We will:
• 	Encourage everyone to participate in solving problems.
• 	Only use constructive criticism and focus on solving problems, not blaming people.
• 	Strive to build on each other’s ideas.
Meeting Guidelines: We will:
• 	Plan to have a face-to-face meeting the first and third Tuesday morning of every month.
• 	Meet more frequently the first month.
• 	Arrange for telephone or videoconferencing for participants as needed.
• 	Hold other meetings as needed.
• 	Record meeting minutes and send them via e-mail within 24 hours of all project meet-
ings, focusing on decisions made and action items from each meeting.
© Cengage Learning 2014
104
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 15 of 31 --

TABLE 3-9 	Scope statement (draft version)
Project Title: Project Management Intranet Site Project
Date: May 18 	Prepared by: Erica Bell, Project Manager, erica_bell@jwdconsulting.com
Project Summary and Justification: Joe Fleming, CEO of JWD Consulting, requested this project to
assist the company in meeting its strategic goals. The new intranet site will increase visibility of the
company’s expertise to current and potential clients. It will also help reduce internal costs and improve
profitability by providing standard tools, techniques, templates, and project management knowledge to
all internal consultants. The budget for the project is $140,000. An additional $40,000 per year will be
required for operational expenses after the project is completed. Estimated benefits are $200,000 each
year. It is important to focus on the system paying for itself within one year of its completion.
Product Characteristics and Requirements:
1. Templates and tools: The intranet site will allow authorized users to download files they can use to
create project management documents and to help them use project management tools. These
files will be in Microsoft Word, Excel, Access, Project, or in HTML or PDF format, as appropriate.
2. User submissions: Users will be encouraged to e-mail files with sample templates and tools to the
Webmaster. The Webmaster will forward the files to the appropriate person for review and then
post the files to the intranet site, if desired.
3. Articles: Articles posted on the intranet site will have appropriate copyright permission. The pre-
ferred format for articles will be PDF. The project manager may approve other formats.
4. Requests for articles: The intranet site will include a section for users to ask someone from the
Project Management Office (PMO) at JWD Consulting to research appropriate articles for them.
The PMO manager must first approve the request and negotiate payments, if appropriate.
5. Links: All links to external sites will be tested on a weekly basis. Broken links will be fixed or
removed within five working days of discovery.
6. The “Ask the Expert” feature must be user-friendly and capable of soliciting questions and imme-
diately acknowledging that the question has been received in the proper format. The feature must
also be capable of forwarding the question to the appropriate expert (as maintained in the system’s
expert database) and capable of providing the status of questions that are answered. The system
must also allow for payment for advice, if appropriate.
7. Security: The intranet site must provide several levels of security. All internal employees will have
access to the entire intranet site when they enter their security information to access the main,
corporate intranet. Part of the intranet will be available to the public from the corporate Web site.
Other portions of the intranet will be available to current clients based on verification with the
current client database. Other portions of the intranet will be available after negotiating a fee or
entering a fixed payment using pre-authorized payment methods.
8. Search feature: The intranet site must include a search feature for users to search by topic, key
words, etc.
9. The intranet site must be accessible using a standard Internet browser. Users must have appropri-
ate application software to open several of the templates and tools.
10. The intranet site must be available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, with one hour per week for
system maintenance and other periodic maintenance, as appropriate.
Summary of Project Deliverables
Project management-related deliverables: Business case, charter, team contract, scope statement, WBS,
schedule, cost baseline, progress reports, final project presentation, final project report, lessons-learned
report, and any other documents required to manage the project.
Product-related deliverables:
1. Survey: Survey current consultants and clients to help determine desired content and features for
the intranet site.
(continued)
105
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 16 of 31 --

also provides a basis for creating the project schedule and performing earned value
management for measuring and forecasting project performance. Erica and her team
decided to use the project management process groups as the main categories for the WBS,
as shown in Figure 3-3. They included completed work from the initiating process to
TABLE 3-9 	Scope statement (draft version) (continued)
2. Files for templates: The intranet site will include templates for at least 20 documents when the
system is first implemented, and it will have the capacity to store up to 100 documents. The proj-
ect team will decide on the initial 20 templates based on survey results.
3. Examples of completed templates: The intranet site will include examples of projects that have
used the templates available on the site. For example, if there is a template for a business case,
there will also be an example of a real business case that uses the template.
4. Instructions for using project management tools: The intranet site will include information on how
to use several project management tools, including the following as a minimum: work breakdown
structures, Gantt charts, network diagrams, cost estimates, and earned value management. Where
appropriate, sample files will be provided in the application software appropriate for the tool. For
example, Microsoft Project files will be available to show sample work breakdown structures, Gantt
charts, network diagrams, cost estimates, and applications of earned value management. Excel files
will be available for sample cost estimates and earned value management charts.
5. Example applications of tools: The intranet site will include examples of real projects that have
applied the tools listed in number 4 above.
6. Articles: The intranet site will include at least 10 useful articles about relevant topics in project
management. The intranet site will have the capacity to store at least 1,000 articles in PDF format
with an average length of 10 pages each.
7. Links: The intranet site will include links with brief descriptions for at least 20 useful sites. The
links will be categorized into meaningful groups.
8. Expert database: In order to deliver an “Ask the Expert” feature, the system must include and
access a database of approved experts and their contact information. Users will be able to search
for experts by predefined topics.
9. User Requests feature: The intranet site will include an application to solicit and process requests
from users.
10. Intranet site design: An initial design of the new intranet site will include a site map, suggested formats,
and appropriate graphics. The final design will incorporate comments from users on the initial design.
11. Intranet site content: The intranet site will include content for the templates and tools sections,
articles section, article retrieval section, links section, “Ask the Expert” section, User Requests
feature, security, and payment features.
12. Test plan: The test plan will document how the intranet site will be tested, who will do the testing,
and how bugs will be reported.
13. Promotion: A plan for promoting the intranet site will describe various approaches for soliciting
inputs during design. The promotion plan will also announce the availability of the new intranet site.
14. Project benefit measurement plan: A project benefit plan will measure the financial value of the
intranet site.
Project Success Criteria: Our goal is to complete this project within six months for no more than
$140,000. The project sponsor, Joe Fleming, has emphasized the importance of the project paying for
itself within one year after the intranet site is complete. To meet this financial goal, the intranet site
must have strong user inputs. We must also develop a method for capturing the benefits while the
intranet site is being developed and tested, and after it is rolled out. If the project takes a little longer to
complete or costs a little more than planned, the firm will still view it as a success if it has a good
payback and helps promote the firm’s image as an excellent consulting organization.
© Cengage Learning 2014
106
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 17 of 31 --

1.0 Initiating
1.2 Prepare project charter
1.3 Hold project kick-off meeting
2.0 Planning
2.1 Hold team planning meeting
2.2 Prepare team contract
2.3 Prepare scope statement
2.4 Prepare WBS
2.5 Prepare schedule and cost baseline
2.5.1 Determine task resources
2.5.2 Determine task durations
2.5.3 Determine task dependencies
2.5.4 Create draft Gantt chart
2.5.5 Review and finalize Gantt chart
2.6 Identify, discuss, and prioritize risks
3.0 Executing
3.1 Survey
3.2 User inputs
3.3 Intranet site content
3.3.1 Templates and tools
3.3.2 Articles
3.3.3 Links
3.3.4 Ask the Expert
3.3.5 User requests feature
3.4 Intranet site design
3.5 Intranet site construction
3.6 Intranet site testing
3.7 Intranet site promotion
3.8 Intranet site roll-out
3.9 Project benefits measurement
4.0 Monitoring and Controlling
4.1 Progress reports
5.0 Closing
5.1 Prepare final project report
5.2 Prepare final project presentation
5.3 Lessons learned
1.1 Identify key stakeholders
© Cengage Learning 2014
FIGURE 3-3 	JWD Consulting intranet project work breakdown structure (WBS)
107
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 18 of 31 --

provide a complete picture of the project’s scope. The group members also wanted to list
several milestones on their schedule, such as the completion of key deliverables, so they
prepared a separate list of milestones that they would include on the Gantt chart. You will
learn more about creating a WBS in Chapter 5, Project Scope Management.
After preparing the WBS, the project team held another face-to-face meeting to
develop the project schedule, following the steps outlined in section 2.5 of the WBS. Sev-
eral of the project schedule tasks are dependent on one another. For example, the intranet
site testing was dependent on the construction and completion of the content tasks.
Everyone participated in the development of the schedule, especially the tasks on which
each member would be working. Some of the tasks were broken down further so the team
members had a better understanding of what they had to do and when. They also kept
their workloads and cost constraints in mind when developing the duration estimates. For
example, Erica was scheduled to work 20 hours per week on this project, and the other
project team members combined should not spend more than 60 hours per week on aver-
age for the project. As team members provided duration estimates, they also estimated
how many work hours they would spend on each task.
After the meeting, Erica worked with Jessie to enter all of the information into Micro-
soft Project. Erica was using the intranet site project to train Jessie in applying several
project management tools and templates. They entered all of the tasks, duration estimates,
and dependencies to develop the Gantt chart. Erica decided to enter the resource and cost
information after reviewing the schedule. Their initial inputs resulted in a completion date
that was a few weeks later than planned. Erica and Jessie reviewed the critical path for the
project, and Erica had to shorten the duration estimates for a few critical tasks to meet
their schedule goal of completing the project within six months. She talked to the team
members working on those tasks, and they agreed that they could plan to work more hours
each week on those tasks, if required, to complete them on time. Figure 3-4 shows the
resulting Gantt chart created in Microsoft Project. Only the executing tasks are expanded
© Cengage Learning 2014
FIGURE 3-4 	JWD Consulting intranet site project baseline Gantt chart
108
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 19 of 31 --

to show the subtasks under that category. (You will learn how to use Project 2010 in
Appendix A. Chapter 6, Project Time Management, explains Gantt charts and other time
management tools.) The baseline schedule projects a completion date of November 1. Also
notice that there is only one delivery of the software, shown as a milestone near the end of
the project, on October 17. The project charter had a planned completion date of Novem-
ber 4. Erica wanted to complete the project on time, and although three extra days was
not much of a buffer, she felt the baseline schedule was very realistic. She would do her
best to help everyone meet their deadlines.
The majority of the costs for this project were internal labor, and the team kept its
labor hour constraints in mind when developing task duration estimates. Erica and Jessie
entered each project team member’s name and labor rate in the resource sheet for their
Microsoft Project file. The client representatives were not being paid for their time, so she
left their labor rates at the default value of zero. Erica had also included $10,000 for pro-
curement in the financial analysis she prepared for the business case, and she showed
Jessie how to enter that amount as a fixed cost split equally between the “Ask the Expert”
and User Requests features, where she thought they would have to purchase some external
software and services. Erica then helped Jessie assign resources to tasks, entering the pro-
jected number of hours everyone planned to work each week on each task. They then ran
several cost reports and made a few minor adjustments to resource assignments to make
their planned total cost meet their budget constraints. Their cost baseline was very close
to their planned budget of $140,000.
The last deliverable her team needed to create within the planning process group was
a list of prioritized risks. This information will be updated and expanded as the project
progresses in a risk register, which also includes information on root causes of the risks,
warning signs that potential risks might occur, and response strategies for the risks. (See
Chapter 11, Project Risk Management, for more information on risk registers.) Erica
reviewed the risks she had mentioned in the business case as well as the comments team
members made on the project charter and in their team meetings. She held a special
meeting for everyone to brainstorm and discuss potential risks. They posted all of the risks
they identified on a probability/impact matrix, and then they grouped some of the ideas.
Only one risk was in the high probability and high impact category, and several had
medium impact in one or both categories. They chose not to list the low-probability and
low-impact risks. After some discussion, the team developed the list of prioritized risks
shown in Table 3-10.
Project Execution
Executing the project involves taking the actions necessary to ensure that activities in the
project plan are completed. It also includes work required to introduce any new hardware,
software, and procedures into normal operations. The products of the project are created
during project execution, and it usually takes the most resources to accomplish this pro-
cess. Table 3-11 lists the knowledge areas, executing processes, and outputs of project
execution listed in the PMBOK® Guide, Fifth Edition. Many project sponsors and custo-
mers focus on deliverables related to providing the products, services, or results desired
from the project. It is also important to document change requests and prepare updates to
planning documents as part of execution. Templates related to this process group are also
listed later in this chapter.
109
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 20 of 31 --

For this relatively small project, Erica would work closely with all the team mem-
bers to make sure they were producing the desired work results. She also used her
networking skills to get input from other people in the firm and from external sources
at no additional cost to the project. She made sure that everyone who would use the
resulting intranet application also understood what they were producing as part of the
project and how it would help them in the future. She knew that providing strong lead-
ership and using good communication skills were crucial to good project execution. The
firm did have a formal change request form, but primarily used it for external projects.
The firm also had contract specialists and templates for several procurement docu-
ments that the project team would use for the portions of the project it planned to
outsource.
As mentioned earlier, Erica knew that Joe, the CEO and project sponsor, liked
to see progress on projects through milestone reports. He also wanted Erica to
alert him to any potential issues or problems. Table 3-12 shows a sample of a milestone
report for the project management intranet site project that Erica reviewed with
Joe in mid-June. Erica met with most of her project team members often, and she
talked to Joe about once a week to review progress on completing milestones
and to discuss any other project issues. Although Erica could have used project
management software to create milestone reports, she used word-processing software
instead because this project was small and she could more easily manipulate the report
format.
Human resource issues often occur during project execution, especially conflicts. At
several of the team meetings, Erica could see that Michael seemed to be bored and often
left the room to make phone calls to clients. She talked to Michael about the situation,
and she discovered that Michael was supportive of the project, but he knew he could only
spend a minimal amount of time on it. He was much more productive outside of meetings,
TABLE 3-10 List of prioritized risks
Ranking 	Potential Risk
1 	Lack of inputs from internal consultants
2 	Lack of inputs from client representatives
3 	Security of new system
4 	Outsourcing/purchasing for the article retrieval and “Ask the Expert” features
5 	Outsourcing/purchasing for processing online payment transactions
6 	Organizing the templates and examples in a useful fashion
7 	Providing an efficient search feature
8 	Getting good feedback from Michael Chen and other senior consultants
9 	Effectively promoting the new system
10 	Realizing the benefits of the new system within one year
© Cengage Learning 2014
110
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 21 of 31 --

TABLE 3-11 Executing processes and outputs
Knowledge Area 	Executing Process 	Outputs
Project Integration
Management
Direct and manage project
work
Deliverables
Work performance data
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Quality
Management
Perform quality assurance 	Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Project Human
Resource Management
Acquire project team 	Project staff assignments
Resource calendars
Project management plan updates
Develop project team 	Team performance assessments
Enterprise environmental factor
updates
Manage project team 	Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Enterprise environmental factors
updates
Organizational process assets updates
Project Communica-
tions Management
Manage communications 	Project communications
Project documents updates
Project management plan updates
Organizational process assets updates
Project Procurement
Management
Conduct procurements 	Selected sellers
Agreements
Resource calendars
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Stakeholder
Management
Manage stakeholder
engagement
Issue log
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Source: PMBOK® Guide, Fifth Edition, 2012.
111
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 22 of 31 --

TABLE 3-12 Milestone report as of June 17
Milestone 	Date 	Status 	Responsible
Issues/
Comments
Initiating
Stakeholders identified 	May 2 	Completed 	Erica and Joe
Project charter signed 	May 10 	Completed 	Erica
Project kick-off meeting held 	May 13 	Completed 	Erica 	Went very well
Planning
Team contract signed 	May 13 	Completed 	Erica
Scope statement completed 	May 27 	Completed 	Erica
WBS completed 	May 31 	Completed 	Erica
List of prioritized risks
completed
June 3 	Completed 	Erica 	Reviewed with
sponsor and
team
Schedule and cost baseline
completed
June 13 	Completed 	Erica
Executing
Survey completed 	June 28 	Erica 	Poor response
so far!
Intranet site design
completed
July 26 	Kevin
Project benefits
measurement completed
August 9 	Erica
User inputs collected 	August 9 	Jessie
Articles completed 	August 23 	Jessie
Templates and tools
completed
September 6 	Erica
Ask the Expert completed 	September 6 	Michael
User Requests feature
completed
September 6 	Cindy
Links completed 	September 13 	Kevin
Intranet site construction
completed
October 4 	Kevin
Intranet site testing
completed
October 18 	Cindy
Intranet site promotion
completed
October 25 	Erica
112
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 23 of 31 --

so Erica agreed to have Michael attend a minimal number of project team meetings.
She could see that Michael was contributing to the team by the feedback he provided and
his leadership on the “Ask the Expert” feature for the intranet site. Erica adjusted her
communication style to meet his specific needs.
Another problem occurred when Cindy was contacting potential suppliers for software
to help with the “Ask the Expert” and User Requests features. Kevin wanted to write all of
the software for the project himself, but Cindy knew it made better business sense to pur-
chase these new software capabilities from a reliable source. Cindy had to convince Kevin
that it was worth buying some software from other sources.
Cindy also discovered that their estimate of $10,000 was only about half the amount
they needed for software services. She discussed the problem with Erica, explaining the
need for some custom development no matter which supplier they chose. Erica agreed that
they should go with an outside source, and she asked their sponsor to approve the addi-
tional funds. Joe agreed, but he stressed the importance of still having the system pay for
itself within a year.
Erica also had to ask Joe for help when the project team received a low response rate
to their survey and requests for user inputs. Joe sent an e-mail to all of JWD Consulting’s
consultants describing the importance of the project. He also offered five extra vacation
days to the person who provided the best examples of how they used tools and templates
to manage their projects. Erica then received informative input from the consultants.
Having effective communication skills and strong top management support are essential
to good project execution.
TABLE 3-12 	Milestone report as of June 17 (continued)
Milestone 	Date 	Status 	Responsible
Issues/
Comments
Intranet site roll-out
completed
October 25 	Kevin
Monitoring and Controlling
Progress reports 	Every Friday 	All
Closing
Final project presentation
completed
October 27 	Erica
Sponsor sign-off on project
completed
October 27 	Joe
Final project report
completed
October 28 	Erica
Lessons-learned reports
submitted
November 1 	All
© Cengage Learning 2014
113
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 24 of 31 --

B E S T 	P R A C T I C E
One way to learn about best practices in project management is by studying recipients
of PMI’s Project of the Year award. The Quartier International de Montréal (QIM),
Montreal’s international district, was a 66-acre urban revitalization project in the heart of
downtown Montreal. This $90 million, five-year project turned a once unpopular area
into a thriving section of the city with a booming real estate market, and has generated
$770 million in related construction. Clement Demers, PMP, was the director general for
the QIM project. He said the team “took a unique project execution approach by dividing
work into packages that allowed for smaller-scale testing of management techniques and
contract awards. Benefiting from experience gained in each stage, managers could then
adjust future work segments and management styles accordingly.”9
Other strategies that helped the team succeed included the following:
• 	The team identified champions in each stakeholder group to help inspire others
to achieve project goals.
• 	The team’s communications plan included a Web site dedicated to public
concerns.
• 	There were two-day reviews at the beginning of each project phase to discuss
problems and develop solutions to prevent conflict.
• 	Financial investors were asked for input to increase their stake in the project.
• 	The team recognized the value of hiring high-quality experts, such as archi-
tects, engineers, lawyers, and urban planners. They paid all professionals a
fixed price for their services and paid their fees quickly.
Project Monitoring and Controlling
Monitoring and controlling is the process of measuring progress toward project objectives,
monitoring deviation from the plan, and taking corrective action to match progress with
the plan. Monitoring and controlling is done throughout the life of a project. It also involves
nine of the 10 project management knowledge areas. Table 3-13 lists the knowledge areas,
monitoring and controlling processes, and outputs, according to the PMBOK® Guide, Fifth
Edition. Templates related to this process group are listed later in this chapter.
On the project management intranet site project, there were several updates to the
project management plan to reflect changes made to the project scope, schedule, and
budget. Erica and other project team members took corrective action when necessary. For
example, when they were not getting many responses to their survey, Erica asked Joe for
help. When Cindy had trouble negotiating with a supplier, she got help from another senior
consultant who had worked with that supplier in the past. Erica also had to request more
funds for that part of the project.
Project team members submitted a brief progress report every Friday to show work
performance information. They were originally using a company template for progress
reports, but Erica found that by modifying the old template, she received better informa-
tion to help her team work more effectively. She wanted team members not only to report
what they did but also to focus on what was going well or not going well, and why. This
extra information helped team members reflect on the project’s progress and identify areas
in need of improvement. Table 3-14 is an example of one of Cindy’s progress reports.
In addition to progress reports, an important tool for monitoring and controlling the proj-
ect was using project management software. All team members submitted their actual hours
114
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 25 of 31 --

TABLE 3-13 Monitoring and controlling processes and outputs
Knowledge Area
Monitoring and
Controlling Process 	Outputs
Project Integration
Management
Monitor and control
project work
Change requests
Work performance reports
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Perform integrated
change control
Approved change requests
Change log
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Project Scope Management 	Validate scope 	Accepted deliverables
Change requests
Work performance information
Project documents updates
Control scope 	Work performance information
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Project Time Management 	Control schedule 	Work performance information
Schedule forecasts
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Project Cost Management 	Control cost 	Work performance information
Cost forecasts
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Project Quality
Management
Control quality 	Quality control measurements
Validated changes
Validated deliverables
Work performance information
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
(continued)
115
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 26 of 31 --

worked on tasks each Friday afternoon by 4 p.m. via the firm’s enterprise-wide project
management software. They were using the enterprise version of Microsoft Project
2010, so they could easily update their task information via the Web. Erica worked with
Jessie to analyze the information, paying special attention to the critical path and earned
value data. (See Chapter 6, Project Time Management, for more information on critical
path analysis; Chapter 7, Project Cost Management, for a description of earned value
management; and Appendix A for more information on using Project 2010 to help control
projects.) Erica wanted to finish the project on time, even if it meant spending more money.
Joe agreed with that approach, and approved the additional funding Erica projected they
would need based on the earned value projections and the need to make up a little time on
critical tasks.
Joe again emphasized the importance of the new system paying for itself within a year.
Erica was confident that they could exceed the projected financial benefits, and she
decided to begin capturing benefits as soon as the project team began testing the system.
When she was not working on this project, Erica was managing JWD Consulting’s Project
Management Office (PMO), and she could already see how the intranet site would help her
staff save time and make their consultants more productive. One of her staff members
wanted to move into the consulting group, and she believed the PMO could continue to
provide its current services with one less person due to this new system—a benefit
Erica had not considered before. Several of the firm’s client contracts were based on
TABLE 3-13 	Monitoring and controlling processes and outputs (continued)
Knowledge Area
Monitoring and
Controlling Process 	Outputs
Project Communications
Management
Control communications 	Work performance information
Change requests
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Project Risk Management 	Control risks 	Work performance information
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Project Procurement
Management
Control procurements 	Work performance information
Change requests
Project management plan updates
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Project Stakeholder
Management
Control stakeholder
engagement
Work performance information
Change requests
Project documents updates
Organizational process assets updates
Source: PMBOK® Guide, Fifth Edition, 2012.
116
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 27 of 31 --

performance and not hours billed, so she was excited to start measuring the value of the
new intranet site to their consultants as well.
Project Closing
The closing process involves gaining stakeholder and customer acceptance of the final
products and services and then bringing the project or project phase to an orderly end. It
includes verifying that all of the deliverables are complete, and it often includes a final
project report and presentation. Even though many IT projects are canceled before
completion, it is still important to formally close any project and reflect on what can be
learned to improve future projects. As philosopher George Santayana said, “Those who
cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.”
TABLE 3-14 Sample weekly progress report
Project Name: Project Management Intranet Project
Team Member Name: Cindy Dawson, cindy_dawson@jwdconsulting.com
Date: August 5
Work completed this week:
–Worked with Kevin to start the intranet site construction
–Organized all the content files
–Started developing a file naming scheme for content files
–Continued work on “Ask the Expert” and User Requests features
–Met with preferred supplier
–Verified that their software would meet our needs
–Discovered the need for some customization
Work to complete next week:
–Continue work on intranet site construction
–Prepare draft contract for preferred supplier
–Develop new cost estimate for outsourced work
What’s going well and why:
The intranet site construction started well. The design was very clear and easy to follow. Kevin really
knows what he’s doing.
What’s not going well and why:
It is difficult to decide how to organize the templates and examples. Need more input from senior
consultants and clients.
Suggestions/Issues:
–Hold a special meeting to decide how to organize the templates and examples on the intranet site.
–Get some sample contracts and help in negotiating with the preferred supplier.
Project changes:
I think we can stay on schedule, but it looks like we’ll need about $10,000 more for outsourcing. That’s
doubling our budget in that area.
© Cengage Learning 2014
117
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 28 of 31 --

It is also important to plan for and execute a smooth transition of the project into
the normal operations of the company. Most projects produce results that are integrated
into the existing organizational structure. For example, JWD Consulting’s project man-
agement intranet site project will require staff to support the intranet site after it is
operational. Erica included support costs of $40,000 per year for the projected three-
year life of the new system. She also created a transition plan as part of the final report
to provide for a smooth transition of the system into the firm’s operations. The plan
included a list of issues that had to be resolved before the firm could put the new intra-
net site into production. For example, Michael Chen would not be available to work on
the intranet site after the six-month project was complete, so the team had to know who
would support the “Ask the Expert” feature and plan some time for Michael to work with
that person.
Table 3-15 lists the knowledge areas, processes, and outputs of project closing based
on the PMBOK® Guide, Fifth Edition. During the closing processes of any project, project
team members must deliver the final product, service, or result of the project, and update
organizational process assets, such as project files and a lessons-learned report. If project
team members procured items during the project, they must formally complete or close
out all contracts. Templates related to project closing are listed later in this chapter.
Erica and her team prepared a final report, final presentation, contract files, and
lessons-learned report in closing the project. Erica reviewed the confidential, individual
lessons-learned reports from each team member and wrote one summary lessons-learned
report to include in the final documentation, part of which is provided in Table 3-16.
Notice the bulleted items in the fourth question, such as the importance of having a good
kick-off meeting, working together to develop a team contract, using project management
software, and communicating well with the project team and sponsor.
Erica also had Joe sign a client acceptance form, one of the sample templates on the
new intranet site that the project team suggested all consultants use when closing their
projects. (You can find this and other templates on the companion Web site for this text.)
Table 3-17 provides the table of contents for the final project report. The cover page
included the project title, date, and team member names. Notice the inclusion of a transi-
tion plan and a plan to analyze the benefits of the system each year in the final report.
Also, notice that the final report includes attachments for all the project management
and product-related documents. Erica knew how important it was to provide good final
documentation on projects. The project team produced a hard copy of the final
TABLE 3-15 Closing processes and output
Knowledge Area 	Closing Process 	Outputs
Project Integration
Management
Close project or phase 	Final product, service, or result transition
Organizational process assets updates
Project Procurement
Management
Close procurements 	Closed procurements
Organizational process assets updates
Source: PMBOK® Guide, Fifth Edition, 2012.
118
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 29 of 31 --

TABLE 3-16 Lessons-learned report (abbreviated)
Project Name: 	JWD Consulting Project Management Intranet Site Project
Project Sponsor: 	Joe Fleming
Project Manager: 	Erica Bell
Project Dates: 	May 2 – November 4
Final Budget: 	$150,000
1. Did the project meet scope, time, and cost goals?
We did meet scope and time goals, but we had to request an additional $10,000, which the sponsor
did approve.
2. 	What were the success criteria listed in the project scope statement?
Below is what we put in our project scope statement under project success criteria:
“Our goal is to complete this project within six months for no more than $140,000. The
project sponsor, Joe Fleming, has emphasized the importance of the project paying for itself
within one year after the intranet site is complete. To meet this financial goal, the intranet site
must have strong user input. We must also develop a method for capturing the benefits while
the intranet site is being developed and tested, and after it is rolled out. If the project takes a
little longer to complete or costs a little more than planned, the firm will still view it as a
success if it has a good payback and helps promote the firm’s image as an excellent
consulting organization.”
3. 	Reflect on whether you met the project success criteria.
As stated above, the sponsor was not too concerned about going over budget as long as the
system would have a good payback period and help promote our firm’s image. We have
already documented some financial and image benefits of the new intranet site. For
example, we have decided that we can staff the PMO with one less person, resulting
in substantial cost savings. We have also received excellent feedback from several of our
clients about the new intranet site.
4. 	In terms of managing the project, what were the main lessons your team learned from this project?
The main lessons we learned include the following:
• 	Having a good project sponsor was instrumental to project success. We ran into a couple of
difficult situations, and Joe was very creative in helping us solve problems.
• 	Teamwork was essential. It really helped to take time for everyone to get to know each other
at the kick-off meeting. It was also helpful to develop and follow a team contract.
• 	Good planning paid off in execution. We spent a fair amount of time developing a good proj-
ect charter, scope statement, WBS, schedules, and so on. Everyone worked together to develop
these planning documents, and there was strong buy-in.
• 	Project management software was very helpful throughout the project.
5. 	Describe one example of what went right on this project.
6. 	Describe one example of what went wrong on this project.
7. 	What will you do differently on the next project based on your experience working on this
project?
© Cengage Learning 2014
119
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 30 of 31 --

documentation and an electronic copy to store on the new intranet site for other consul-
tants to use as desired.
Erica also organized a project closure luncheon for the project team right after the
final project presentation. She used the luncheon to share lessons learned and celebrate a
job well done!
CASE STUDY 2: JWD CONSULTING’S PROJECT MANAGEMENT
INTRANET SITE PROJECT (AGILE APPROACH)
This section demonstrates a more agile approach to managing JWD Consulting’s project
management intranet site project. Instead of repeating the sample documents shown in
the first, more predictive case study, this section emphasizes the differences of using an
TABLE 3-17 Final project report table of contents
1. Project Objectives
2. Summary of Project Results
3. Original and Actual Start and End Dates
4. Original and Actual Budget
5. Project Assessment (Why did you do this project? What did you produce? Was the project a
success? What went right and wrong on the project?)
6. Transition Plan
7. Annual Project Benefits Measurement Approach
Attachments:
A. Project Management Documentation
• 	Business case
• 	Project charter
• 	Team contract
• 	Scope statement
• 	WBS and WBS dictionary
• 	Baseline and actual Gantt chart
• 	List of prioritized risks
• 	Milestone reports
• 	Progress reports
• 	Contract files
• 	Lessons-learned reports
• 	Final presentation
• 	Client acceptance form
B. Product-Related Documentation
• 	Survey and results
• 	Summary of user inputs
• 	Intranet site content
• 	Intranet site design documents
• 	Test plans and reports
• 	Intranet site promotion information
• 	Intranet site roll-out information
• 	Project benefits measurement information
© Cengage Learning 2014
120
Chapter 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

-- 31 of 31 --

